I take the same test year by year and I
am 60% happier than I was 5 years ago
because I finally cracked the code okay
so Arthur BR the world-renowned social
scientist har Professor best-selling
author who teaches people how to live a
better happier life I've studied the
science of happiness and I found that
most of what Society tells us is wrong
and we will go into all of this for
example they found that happiness is
about 50% genetic introverts tend to
have more long-term Happiness and
happiness is a mind virus it will
transmit from one person to another
person to another person really yeah
they were looking at the trajectory of
people's lives measuring everything for
many years and they found obesity is
contagious when your friends get
divorced you're more likely to get
divorced but also when your friends get
happy you're more likely to get happy
the problem is with happiness has been
in Decline since about 1990 one of the
reasons is that we need struggle and
suffering for us to actually get the joy
that we seek but we know that for
example 95% of D fail is the most
unsuccessful industry in the world
because the arrival fallacy that when I
actually get rid of the belly fat then
I'm actually going to have a more
wonderful life that's actually not true
you actually get more satisfaction from
the progress okay so if not a weight
number or a financial number what's a
better more realistic goal to set that
has more chance of success to being
happier there are goals that actually do
lead to the happiest life and the more
you have the better off you are the four
goals that really matter
are quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guest helps us scale the production
and it makes this show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched the show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here here gets better and better
and better and better that is a promise
I'm willing to make you do we have a
[Music]
deal Arthur Steve what do you do I
am dedicated to lifting people up and
bringing them together using the science
and ideas around human happiness where
did you teach I teach at Harvard
University are you a professor of
Happiness yeah I'm a professor of
leadership technically at the Harvard
Kennedy School and the Harvard Business
School but my area is leadership and
happiness so I've studied the the
science of Happiness which is a huge
growing field multi-dimensional field
across Social Psychology and
Neuroscience behavioral economics
Philosophy for a long time and what I
try to do is I bring it to Future
Leaders in politics and policy and
especially business and help them
understand themselves as happiness
teachers so they can be happier and they
can be more successful and bring more
happiness to the people they lead what
is the state of Happiness can you qu can
we quantify that where we are in terms
of are we getting happier as a people or
more unhappy as a people we can we can't
so the United Nations and a lot of other
places try to see the happiest country
you've seen those data a lot the
happiest countri it's always Denmark
it's always the Nordic countries um you
can't do that and that's like the way
that that happens is they go to 100
countries and they they survey a
thousand people in each of countries and
say how do you evaluate your life that's
like asking people in every country how
much you like the music in your country
and on the basis of the highest rankings
internally you say who has the best
music that doesn't really make sense
it's you know it's bad methodology you
can look at the average well-being
across a population where people are
having more or less the same experience
so I on inside countries inside
communities over time I'm I'm willing to
look at that and that shows that in most
of the oecd countries including the
United States and UK our countries um
happiness has been in Decline since
about
1990 since about 1990 yeah is that when
you were born yeah
92 it's not you it's
us what is um I always think when people
commit their lives largely to a topic
that that must have very personal roots
with that individual sure what are your
personal roots with the subject of
Happiness it's hard for me it's hard for
me I'm not a naturally happy person I'm
way below average in happiness and at
least 50% of that is genetic by the way
so there's a lot of research looking at
identical twins there's a whole database
of identical twins born between the mid
1930s and 1960s that were adopted into
separate families at Birth then reunited
as adults this was not an experiment
that was cooked up by some you know
diabolical Harvard you know social
scientists like me it was it happened
naturally just over the of events and
when they were reunited they were given
personality tests you can see some of
these meetings where they were reunited
on on YouTube and they're they're
wonderful they're joyful and funny you
find that you have an identical twin you
didn't know about and say finding all
these commonalities but of course
there's always a bunch of social
scientists you know with with clipboards
you know Annoying them like me you know
taking data and so the personality tests
all show that between 40 and 80% of your
personality genetic
and the rest is
environmental and experiential and
circumstantial but 80% up to 80% that's
a lot and that means your openness to
experience your conscientiousness as a
person your extroversion agreeableness
neuroticism and and happiness is about
50% genetic your mother literally made
you unhappy
Steve I'm or happy your results May Vary
was your household a happy
place it was a complicated place but it
wasn't terrible because my parents were
good parents and they loved each other
and they loved us but my relationship by
the time I was a young adult was
cordial because they were busy with
their issues and you know this is one of
the things that I talk about with a lot
of people nobody has a perfect childhood
and a lot of people are troubled by
their childhood and they feel doomed to
repeat the circumstances of their
childhoods but they're not you can
rewrite your own past history by looking
back at what happened and deciding to
change certain variables in the way that
you're going to live your adult life so
Steve you're going to get married and
you're going to have children and then
you need to look at your own childhood
and say what are the things that I want
to be the same and what are the things
that I want to be different I'm
designing my life right now on not just
on the basis of the things that went
right but on the basis of the things
that went wrong you know I wasn't close
to my parents they never lived close to
me my children who are now growing up
never had a an intense experience of a
relationship with any of their
grandparents they're one side lived in
Barcelona the other side lived in
Seattle we were you know in New York and
Washington DC and and and and so now no
you know I'm I'm going to live near my
kids and I'm a grandfather now um all
three of my adult kids are hearing from
me every day on FaceTime whether they
want to or not I see my grandson as much
as I can next week I turn down a whole
bunch of work because I I get to babysit
my my grandson is there any research
that proves people who have hope in
their lives have greater chances of
survival whether it's with when they're
suffering with you know illnesses or I
often think about this sort of
stereotype that when someone retires
yeah or when they stop working or when
their partner dies in old age so they
might be both of them might be 90 years
old when one of the partners dies it
seems that the the remaining the
surviving partner has months left
sometimes that's mostly true the when is
not true here's this is depressing how
you know that statistic which is that if
the husband dies the wife is going to be
fine really yeah widows are way happier
than widowers I told that to my wife and
she's like
huh um widowers do really poorly
generally men do very poorly part of the
reason is
because these data are disputed but more
or less they're they're directionally
correct 60% of 60-year old men say their
best friend is their wife 30% of their
wives say their best friend is their
husband women have more relationships
they have close or deeper love
relationships with non-related kin and
with the adult children typically than
than the than the husband does the
husband's most intense companion
relationship typically is with the wife
and that's why that's an asymmetric stat
and that's what the data say but yeah
for sure I mean back to the main point
hope is super critical on illness on
everything I mean hope actually affects
all sorts of physiological processes and
we know that when people lose hope they
give up and when they give up they don't
take care of themselves they don't do
what they need to do they don't exercise
like they should they don't they're not
as active they're not talking to other
people their minds are not stimulated
they don't eat right they might use
substances and ways that they shouldn't
and all of those things compound and so
just at the physiological level you'd
see that you'd be You' have degradation
when there is no hope and when you're 90
you can't afford it actually I'm 59 I
can't afford it either and neither can
you at 31 we all need hope this is he
huge to the extent that you can actually
bring hope to People by showing them
they can do something as an agent in
their own future that's just giving them
a longer better more successful life
that that's that's what I want to do
with my work you know because I've seen
so much I mean since I've actually
dedicated myself to this I have very
good protocols for measuring my own
well-being and I don't game the numbers
I mean I have there there's
macronutrients to your happiness you
have to take the different elements it's
not a single measur thing and there are
micronutrients that you can aggregate up
to it and I follow this um very
carefully month by month by month
semester by semester year by year and I
take the same tests as my students do
every year and I am 60% happier than I
was five years ago because of my work
because of the work that you've done on
yourself or because of your work as a
both because here's the deal if you want
to be happier you need to understand the
science you need to apply it to your
life you need to share it with others
because you won't remember it and hold
yourself accountable unless you're
teaching it that's why I teach people to
be happiness teachers interesting yeah
yeah so so my guess is how long you been
doing the podcast two years we launched
on YouTube three years ago yeah it's uh
it's probably having a big effect on
your life huge because you're talking
about these ideas and my guess is that
you're in your private life you're
talking about the ideas that you learned
with other people and every time you
share these ideas you imprint them not
just sort of they're not just limic
fantasms they become you use them with
the executive centers of your brain the
more that you learn the more you talk
about what you learn the better off you
get you're only talking about things
that Empower people and lift them up and
make their lives better these are the
topics of what you do right because you
want people to be happier and more
successful that's the point of the show
right and that's how you're getting
happier and more
successful is there research that shows
this point of agency correlates to
happiness and survival yes like
longevity and so agency essentially
means that the belief that you have
control over your life and your future
in essence yeah and that you're there
are things that you can do so that
you're not helpless helplessness is the
problem this this gets back to the work
of Marty Seligman in the in the late 60s
and 19 early 1970s he's the father of
positive psychology he created the whole
field of positive psychology he's a
great mentor and hero to me he's done so
much for me and and intellectually and
in my career and as as a friend just as
a person and when he was doing his early
work he was doing animal stuff studies
and work on human beings to take away
their agency so he would do things like
people would be you know putting nickels
into a slot machine and they would
figure out along the way that it didn't
matter if they pulled the handle or not
that they were getting the same outcomes
that he took away just little tiny bits
of agency he had dogs in boxes where the
they would shock the floors of the boxes
this is hard to get through internal
review boards now but they would because
it seems cruel it wasn't big shocks but
the whole point was that the dogs would
you know step off the parts of the floor
that were shocking them but when they
couldn't do that anymore they would just
like lie down and whimper on the
shocking floor they would give up this
is called learned helplessness people
will learn their helplessness when they
realize that when they when or they
figure out or they conclude or they're
told by politicians and media and
activists and everybody else that
there's nothing that they can do and
they're a victim when you take on the
identity a victim you learn your
helplessness and that will degrade your
quality of life make you less successful
less happy and a lot of studies say that
you'll you won't even live as
long this point of agency is so
interesting I um I had someone on the
show at the very beginning of the show
and he said that he basically
crowdsources his book guy called Mo gat
you might know the guy says he
crowdsources his book and he gets 500
people to reread to read his book before
it comes out and he goes when we got
down to the part in my book about
personal responsibility he goes 8% of
people drop off the Google Document
because they don't want to read it uhuh
yeah no that's a spinach this this and
and it's interesting because I have this
column that comes out every Thursday
morning in the Atlantic 12 or 1300 words
on the signs of happiness and about once
every two or three months I have a
spinach column which says you want to be
happy be humble you want to be happy
change your mind you want to be happy
don't tell somebody if they disagree
with you that they're stupid and evil
listen listen more than you talk you
know just what your grandmother told you
right about how to be a successful
person but it's all about Humanity about
humility but these are hard things in a
society where all of our biases are I'm
right you're wrong I don't want to
listen la la la la la if it goes against
my my whatever ideological biases that I
happen to have and I'll write a spinach
column and those are the ones that get
way less way fewer readers do you know
what's interesting I was as you were
speaking I was thinking that nobody
thinks they're a victim they can spot
victimhood in other people very
successfully but there's no one
listening to this right now that would
say
I am a victim so how does one know if
they are a victim well I mean a lot of
people will say I am a victim of these
institutional biases a lot of people
will a lot of people really will say
that I mean they will say that I'm a
victim of capitalism or I'm a victim of
powerful people I'm a victim of of
conspiracies that are happen the the
Deep State whatever happens to be a lot
of people really will talk about it in
that particular way and that's sort of
the problem now of course all victims of
something but we all have tons of power
and the really interesting thing in life
is to show people the levels of power
that they have the levers of power that
they have that don't start with trying
to change the outside world that start
with the inside of their heads that's
what I'm dedicated to doing is showing
people that the hope that they should
have comes from the The Leverage they
have over their circumstances which
starts with what they thought they had
the least control over their emotions
their happiness their well-being the
love that they experience because the
commitments that they make if you really
want to have power start with managing
yourself not trying to manage the
outside world is happiness a choice
happiness is unattainable because it's a
direction not a destination is being
happier a choice yes being happier is a
choice on the basis of the commitment
that you are going to make in your life
and in your relationships in the way
that you manage yourself absolutely do
you think there is a starting point to
being happier yeah it actually starts
with a
starts with U recognizing that most of
what Society tells us about happiness is
wrong what's wrong it's not a feeling
happiness is not a feeling on my first
day of class I have you know two
sections of 90 MBA students at the
Harvard Business School and they they're
taking this happiness science of
Happiness seminar I've got 400 in the
waiting list there's an illegal Zoom
link they think I don't know about right
it's the happiness class it's super fun
I love it I love my students they're
terrific and the I cold call them on the
first day by saying you know what's
happiness I pick one two 3 10 what's
happiness and they will say it's the
feeling I get when I'm with the people
that I love or it's how I feel when I'm
doing what I enjoy feelings feelings
feelings feelings I say wrong the
biggest barrier to actually getting
happier is believing that happiness is a
feeling it's not it's happiness is
evidence or feelings are evidence of
Happiness like the smell of dinner is
evidence of dinner that's how to
understand feelings now feelings are
really really important your affect your
mood is critically important but
happiness is something a lot more
tangible you start getting happier the
beginning of Happiness of be of getting
happier because true happiness is not
the goal because you have to have
negative emotions negative emotions keep
you alive negative experiences make you
learn and grow so you don't want pure
happiness the Side of Heaven H dangerous
you'd be dead quickly without a lot of
unhappiness but getting happier starts
with this understanding that really what
it is is the pursuit of three things
enjoyment satisfaction and meaning those
are the three macronutrients so you and
I are nutrition nerds right and what we
all know and I've heard people say on
your show is that most people get
insufficient protein and when you come
to America Everybody Eats way too many
highly glycemic carbohydrates right
happiness is the same thing we get the
macronutrient profile wrong we need more
enjoyment satisfaction and meaning we
know we have to know how to get them in
in efficient and healthy ways and we
need them in Balance can you define
enjoyment satisfaction and meaning for
me what yeah see this is the problem
because a lot of people think they know
what these things are but they aren't
but this is the adventure because once
you kind of get into the details of this
then you've got real strategies for
getting happier the definition provides
strategy so let's start with enjoyment
okay most people think it's the same as
pleasure but that's wrong pleasure is a
limic phenomenon now of course you know
this because you've had you've had
plenty of guests who talked about the
lmic system of the brain that's the
console of tissue deep inside the brain
that's been evolving over the past 40
million years it takes signals from the
brain stem and other parts rudimentary
structures in the brain it takes those
signals about what's going on in the
outside in the lyic system it translates
them into information all your emotions
are is information there's no such thing
as good and bad feelings bad feelings
good feel no they're all good they might
be maladapted but but the point is
positive and negative emotions keep you
alive you need especially the negative
emotions I talk about negative emotions
all the time because they survival is
critical and so anger and sadness and
fear and disgust which are the big four
negative emotions these have kept you
alive thousands and thousands and
thousands of times really important that
information there then is relayed onto
the neocortex of the brain specifically
the prefrontal cortex the bumper of
tissue right behind your forehead where
you can figure out what are these
emotions what do they mean and how am I
going to react according to them now a
lot of times these signals are all
goofed up and and we're very reactive
which means that we're not letting our
prefrontal cortex catch up with our lyic
system and that's a lot of the work that
I do but back to enjoyment enjoyment is
not the same as pleasure because
pleasure is limic it's nothing more than
a signal where the ventral straight and
the reward center of your brain is
getting tapped in the lyic system saying
that thing is going to be good for
survival and passing on your genes
that's why feels good go do it sex and
sugar sex and sugar sex and sugar and a
lot and gambling Which social media has
a lot in common with slot machines and
all these little things that get back to
your primordial evolutionary past I know
you love The evolutionary biology and
psychology because this gives us so much
information about who we are today look
at the place to see and see yourself
kind of and and all of these things that
give us pleasure it's because they they
went back to survival and propagation of
the species so importantly all those
pleasure-filled things if you pursue
them you're just sitting in your lyic
system and modern technology and Society
will engorge these things into
incredibly unhealthy practices so you
get you know we have natural endorphins
that make us feel good and and help us
when we actually get hurt so that we can
get back to our cave and of course we've
chemically altered them into fentel
which feels great until you die fenel is
not a big thing in the UK but it's a
huge thing here it's huge I mean we have
a 100,000 drug overdose deaths every
year in the United States mostly because
of fentanyl it's unbelievable but that
that we have other versions of that you
know we can have stochastic experiences
you know things that that that happen
occasionally and give us a reward when
we when something happens um not in
predictably but
unpredictably um and so we make slot
machines and they give us all this that
you know tap into that that brain
chemistry or we want to propagate the
species and so we turn it into
pornography which is unbelievably
powerful and dangerous for the brain
because it captures the brain and
destroys relationships along the way
it's just feny in its way but all of
these things are just pleasure pleasure
anything that can be addictive which
pleasure-filled things typically can if
you if you do them compulsively over and
over and over again it will make you
less happy but here's know when people
ask me so does that mean I should never
drink alcohol I should never gamble no
no no no you need to add two things to
turn them into enjoyment you need to add
people in memory because if you add
people in memory to something then
you're moving the experience into your
prefrontal
cortex that's when it's fully human
that's when it's not an animal
experience it's a human experience and
that is a very important part of your
happiness and so the big question is if
something's addictive if you're doing it
alone you're probably doing it wrong
what about sex that's pornography and
masturbation is alone and that's not
good for you is the whole
point that's I mean again reasonable
people disagree and some people be like
what's this guy talking about but the
whole point is that that the data on
pornography or that it captures the
brain and ultimately it doesn't on
average lead to happier lives because it
truncates the reproductive experience at
the level of pleasure and doesn't take
it all the way to
enjoyment interesting yeah have you have
you studied porn much as a subject sort
of everybody in my field whes up there
it's not something that I focus that
much on cuz you know it's focusing on
the research on pornography makes you
look a little creepy at P
59 it's not a good look it's like so so
so what do you study it's like
yeah interesting so people in memory
turn pleasure into enjoyment to
enjoyment that's right so alcohol add
people in memory you know the anheiser
bush Corporation doesn't put out
advertisements of you know a dude alone
in his apartment pounding a
12-pack that's how a lot of people use
the product but that's everybody knows
that's an irresponsible dangerous thing
to do that can lead to alcoholism what
they show is the same guy with his
brothers and friends you know clink and
bottles together having a great time
that is pleasure alcohol plus people
plus memory equals enjoyment and that
leads to happiness because they want to
join their brand to happiness not just
to Pure Pleasure and certainly not to
addiction same with like Coca-Cola all
the Coca-Cola ads are like the world cup
with your friends and In Summer with
your friends and and that's actually
less addictive I mean there are certain
you know the sugar and and caffeine are
certainly adictive but they don't have
the same properties of of brain capture
in the same way for sure because they
don't they don't stimulate as much
dopamine as as you know something like
alcohol does and and so they're less
likely to make you really addicted but
the whole point is that they're it it
does give you a little bit of pleasure
but it makes you way happier if you get
to enjoyment and you only get that when
you're doing it with people satisfaction
satisfaction is the joy you get after
struggle you're an entrepreneur you
understand this one really well you're
at deferring your gratification all
entrepreneurs are good successful
entrepreneurs are good at deferring
gratification which means I'm going to
do this hard thing and it's going to get
big payoff and that payoff is going to
be
sweet that's satisfaction there a really
funny thing about humans is that we need
struggle and suffering for us to
actually get the joy that we seek and
that's a really important part of our
happiness so you find the people who are
better at deferring their gratification
get more satisfaction and they're
happier there's a lot of that remember
you've heard about the marshmallow
experiment yeah and you know people have
debunked it but they actually haven't so
the marshmallow experiment was taken
place it took place in the late' 60s
where Walter Michelle was a psychologist
at Stanford out in paloalto he had a you
know a little laboratory set up where he
would come in and sit down on one side
of a table and there was a kid on the
other side of the table between four and
eight years old and in front of the kid
was a marshmallow and so he says to the
kid you want the marshmallow the kid's
like yeah yeah he says I tell you what I
have to go take a phone call in the back
here but when I come back if the
marshmallow is still there I'll give you
another one can you wait every kid's
like yeah totally totally totally worth
it he comes back five minutes later or
so 80% of the kids had eaten the
marshmallow 20% of the kids hadn't now
that's a lot 80% of the kids could not
to further gratification so the real
question is who's the 20% it's Steve
Bartlett that these are the people that
went on to do distinguished things they
did better in school they got better
grades they went on to have more job
success they had better relationships
that's what they found that the most
successful kids now the that what people
fight about now is why whether it's
nature or nurture it's probably 50/50
like everything else in life it's both
nature and nurture but the bigger point
is good things come to those who wait
and when you wait you suffer and you
need that suffering as part of the basic
satisfying experience now the bigger
problem with satisfaction is that Mother
Nature has a big lie at the end of it
Mother Nature says if you get it you're
going to love it forever and that's not
true see the the the brain the brain
works emotionally and physically in um
an environment of homeostasis
homeostasis means that you always return
to your Baseline physiologically and
emotionally because you can't stay in a
in a in in an unusual physiological
State unusual states are are reaction
you need to be ready to react and so you
know you step off the tread Mill your
heart is elevated your heart goes back
to where it was so you're not dead in a
week the same thing is true for you
emotionally something really good or bad
happens to you you think it's going to
last forever so that you have an
incentive to avoid or approach the thing
but it doesn't last forever does it
that's the problem we actually think
that if I get that billion dollars it's
going to be really great and the first
thing that somebody who has a billion
dollars says to her himself is I guess I
needed another billion
because of homeostasis and that puts you
on something called the hedonic
treadmill more more more more more more
more more so that's the great conundrum
of the striver is that there's never
enough Never Enough never enough I deal
with people all day long I really
specialize in people who are incredibly
successful but not happy and a lot of
what I do is explain one simple equation
that both explains that but also gives
you the solution which is that your
satisfaction doesn't come from all the
things that you have so have more is not
the right strategy satisfaction is all
the things you have divided by the
things that you want halves divided by
wants successful people need to manage
their wants even more than they need to
manage their halves they need to want
less and that's a whole kettle of fish
that's spirituality that's discipline
that's Fitness that's diet that's a
whole lot of things that go into that
and that will help you actually get
enduring
satisfaction sounds like a contradiction
though doesn't it sounds like a
contradiction to that the striving and
the struggle is going to make me happy
but I should want less yeah what people
actually who crack this code and and a
lot of you know Eastern Traditions
actually get into this is not that
striving is bad but that striving in
itself has an has a a reward to it that
you that the process and what you find
out along the way is that what you
wanted was not a right rival what you
wanted was progress and then you start
to get the reward from the progress
itself there's a funny thing in the the
in the research on dieting we all know
that is the most expensive unsuccessful
industry in the world right 95% of diets
fail which means within a year people
have gained back all the weight that
they've lost but they're successful in
so far as that almost everybody loses
weight when they go on a diet here's the
thing about diets every day you're
willing to foro the food you like in
exchange for the reward which is the
scale going down
when you hit your goal it's going to be
so great it's going to be so great you
know what the reward is Dave you never
again get to eat the things that you
like for the rest of your life
congratulations once you've got there
that's why you fail and the arrival
fallacy which is an identifiable
phenomenon in my field is that it's
going to be sweet when I get to the goal
it isn't what you're going to have is
homeostasis when you get to your goal
frustration and disappointment therefore
you need to want less you need to think
about the about less about wanting these
arrival experience experiences and get
more satisfaction from the progress from
the journey that's really what it comes
down to and people who crack that code
over the course of self-discipline self-
understanding self-management they can
actually experience remarkably higher
satisfaction the dolly Lama I've been
working with the dolly llama closely for
the past 11 years and I asked him this
question how can I get lasting
satisfaction and he said you need to
want what you have not to have what you
want and that's what it comes down to
it's the management of my wants not my
Hales on that point we're at the time of
year now where so many people are
thinking about diets you mentioned that
there so for those people that are
approaching that moment and that you
know they're going to be setting their
goals and stuff and all those kinds of
things what is a better goal to set if
not a weight number or a financial
number or whatever what's a better more
realistic um goal to set that has more
chance of success yeah has it it's it's
interesting because there are certain
things that we can accumulate that won't
homeostatically return us to the
Baseline that won't throw us onto this
honic treadmill over and over and over
again those goals are the goals that
actually do lead to the happiest life
and the more you have the better off you
are or more actually is better but they
don't fall into the categories of money
power pleasure and fame which are the
typical kind of goals that we get or
related goals like weight loss or you
know whatever it happens to be the four
goals that really matter are Faith
Family friendship and work that serves
others those are the four really great
and Transcendent goals that we can have
now there's nothing wrong with money or
power or pleasure or fame there's
nothing wrong with those things but only
as intermediate goals to make it easier
for us to pursue and
accumulate deeper Faith or philosophical
life I'm not talking about traditional
religious Faith necessarily better
family relationships which are very
mystical um poorly understood even in
Neuroscience in a lot of ways friendship
deep friendship it's hard for a lot of
people especially successful people and
work that where you earn your success
and serve other people that's what it
comes down to so those are the right New
Year's goals that we need you know this
year what am I going to do what how am I
how am I going to grow closer to the
Divine how am I going to do that this
year what am I going to do to draw
closer to my family and to have a a more
intimate relationship with my family how
am I going to have deeper friendships
this year and how am I going to take my
work
and find it more meaningful and
satisfying on the basis of serving other
people how am I going to do that what
is we haven't got to meaning yet yeah we
haven't got to meaning yet you said the
word there but but I want to make sure I
close off on this point about a better
goal because there's still going to be a
huge group of people that go listen I
get it love it I believe it but I hate
this belly fat yeah I get it and this
belly fat yo-yos every year so so those
are intermediate goals and there's
nothing wrong with those things the
problem is where they become satisfying
and self-destructive is when that's the
final goal Because by the time you get
there you think why why that wasn't as
meaningful as I thought that wasn't as
good as I thought that's the arrival
fallacy that when I actually get rid of
the belly fat then I'm actually going to
have somehow a more wonderful life
that's actually not true the reason that
you're doing that is because you want to
live longer with your spouse and see
your and and you dandel your 11
grandchildren on your knee that's the
reason you want to do this because you
need to do it for some intrinsic reason
as opposed to an extrinsic reason having
to do with people will love me more I
mean it's amazing to me cuz I you know
I'm I do a lot of you know wellness and
fitness and stuff as it interacts with
happiness I I work with a lot of people
who are very big in the longevity
Community because I have sort of the
happiness console the science of the
happiness console that I put into those
things and and so I meet a lot of people
that are really into the fitness part
and and what what a lot of guys will
tell me is that they'll have these
fitness goals like I'm going to put on
15 pounds of muscle this year and I'm
going to get rid of all my belly fat and
the whole thing and and buy if they
stick to it by September or October
where they're finding is that you know
they're not getting any more attention
or compliments from women but a lot of
dudes are going looking good dude and
they're like that's not what I
wanted and part of the reason is because
the arrival fallacy is you build up this
image of what will actually come from
the the satis the satisfaction that will
come from hitting these intermediate
goals these aren't the right final goals
you got to have the right final goals
then set some intermediate goals along
the way but not let's not kid ourselves
and when you think carefully about that
that losing your last five pounds of
belly fat so you can see your lower
abs which by the way is not necessarily
that
healthy is going to materially improve
your life and your relationships it's
not just isn't what's a better end goal
then as it relates to Fitness would it
be something more centered on health
yeah it is something that's actually
sustainable and having you do with
health also with happiness is the way
that this works so I work out 60 minutes
a day it's not because I'm vain look I'm
like I got a face for radio Steve I mean
it's good I don't know what you're
talking about I know but it's age
adjusted I look good you know this I
think you look good period and I'm not
you know I've got a girlfriend but
credit where credits to you the thank
you Steve I appreciate that
but you made my week see this was my
goal
yeah but the reason that I do this is
because I find that for me that working
out as much as I can is much harder than
working out every day working out every
day is much easier than working out as
often as I can right amen yeah and
practicing my religion every day is much
easier than practicing my religion when
it when it comes naturally to me or when
I find it convenient eating healthily is
much easier when I do it every day and
so the result of that is that I find
that with those particular routines I
program those things into my life and
I'm a much happier guy look at lowers my
cortisol levels which are naturally very
high I'm a very anxious person um and
and I understand anxiety I understand
the cortisol production I understand how
to manage it and and this is one of my
management techniques thing about
Fitness to understand is when I say it
makes you happier it actually doesn't it
lowers your unhappiness happiness and
unhappiness largely the experiences of
happiness and unhappiness which is to
say posi positive and negative affect
they're produced in different parts of
the lyic system so you can both be very
high happiness and very high unhappiness
I have tests for that that I put my
students through you're probably
somebody who experiences both very high
positive effect and very high negative
effect we've only met but my guess is
that you're a mad scientist that's the
profile and so that means is you got two
strategies you want to keep your
positive effect high and you want to
manage your negative effect effect and
one of the best ways to manage your
negative effect effect is physical
exercise vigorous physical exercise
today today for me was leg day I hate
leg day but I feel pretty good right
now okay that makes sense I've got an
answer there that I that I'm super clear
on um I should be aiming at the end goal
of Happiness ultimately even if it the
intermediary goals are things like belly
fat and these short-term things that are
measurements of my progress towards the
bigger goal and the real key here is
consistency yeah I this was the big
unlock for my whole Fitness thing
because I was that person which will be
90% of people listening now that made
the goal every year that I was going to
go to you know change my life every year
never worked right because I was aiming
at getting a pack for summer so when I
arrived with the six pack and it worked
or summer it was great I look great I
got I actually got I think I got a
couple of compliments which was nice
however the minute summer finished or
the six-pack arrived I could not find
for the life of me the motivation no so
I'd go into winter and I'd become
there's no willpower that can that like
you cannot muscle these things out
unless they become a part of your life
consistency making my goal consistency
andits was the big unlock for me for
sure because then okay the goal
becomes if I go to the gym every day if
I make that part of my habits I'm going
to be healthier happier better at my job
[__] is there anything more important
is that less important than a six-pack
and that mind set shift changed my life
for sure meaning then meaning was the
last of the three yeah meaning is the
why of your life this is the hardest for
most people especially young adults this
is really really hard so meaning is is
really a combination of three things
it's coherent purpose and significance
coherence is things happen for a reason
and so meaning in your life means you
got to have a theory about why things
happen like it's one damn thing after
another I mean you got to have some
concept of why things happen purpose is
my life has Direction and has goals
that's what purpose really is I'm going
in this direction toward these things
without getting stuck on the arrival
fallacy and the last but not least is
significance which is it would matter if
I weren't here I'm significant those are
the three parts of me meaning in
people's lives according to you know
philosophers and social psychologist so
there there's a test that I give my
students that kind of
encompasses these three ideas so you can
remember them into two questions and you
have a meaning crisis if you actually
don't have answers to these questions
that you believe and there's no right
answers you just got to have your
answers you want to play yeah here's the
quiz question number one why are you
alive you can answer that in terms of
who created you or what you're on Earth
to do both okay so why am I alive that's
something that I get to answer every
single day I get to Define that by what
I chose to do this morning when I woke
up what was it I went to the gym I was
on the running machine because I know
I've got a not going to be able to today
and then I came here and had this
conversation with you yeah but why are
you why are you doing this conversation
with me Steve the iag guy Theory comes
to mind when you ask that which is it's
incredibly selfish I learned a
tremendous amount already just from this
conversation and I know that it pays um
pays it forward to other people who are
going to going to learn from it as well
and that makes it feel worthwhile so you
said two things fun and service yeah
right which is more important to
you transcendentally which is more
important to you it's the service part
yeah okay good we're that gives me all
my that gives me all my Worth right but
the more you focus on that the better it
gets now we uncovered that so now
thinking about that you put the order of
operations into the podcast to say did
it does it serve is that guest going to
serve is this question going to serve is
this show going to serve is this
sponsor GNA serve the people who are
watching this podcast then suddenly
meaning starts to go starts to really
spread out of the soil because you we
got to that if it's like is it fun yeah
good so look my my whole have a company
and that that that rides alongside what
I do academically and everybody that
works with me we have an order of
operations and the order of operations
are these are the four goals but they
have to be in this order you just told
me that the order of operations is serve
other people and have fun for your work
that's what you basically said it's
probably more like lift people up and
have an adventure that's probably in
intellectual Adventure right but the
order of operations has to be right if
you're having fun more than you're
serving other people you're not going to
find your sense of meaning based on that
first question so you see you see where
we're going with that right
so the second question is harder for
what are you willing to die today
there's a couple of people in my life
that I die for I die for my romantic
partner i' die for my brothers and
sisters any of them
MH interestingly I don't know if I die
for my parents which is interesting did
you die for an
idea did you die for your
country I would die it when you say for
my country do you mean to save the
country I don't know I mean if you were
called to even if it were
ridiculous even if you thought it were
ridiculous would you die because you
love your
country it depends what you mean by that
what's the cost if I what's the cost if
I stay alive no I know and I and it's it
everything is context specific to a
certain extent but really what I'm I'm
trying to see is what's your what's your
kind of reaction is to this you know to
see what the there are good things in
there you are willing to die for your
girlfriend yeah Will to die for your
brothers and sisters Mom and Dad it's
like jur kind your mom listen to this
podcast they do but I'm just being
honest because I think I think I don't
know why I said that but I just I no for
sure this is good this is really
important right this is worth thinking
about right now the worst answer is I
don't know or nothing those are the
worst answers that doesn't mean it's a
problem on the contrary it's a huge
opportunity huge entrepreneurial
opportunity to realize you don't have
answers to these questions because you
don't have to go to you know get your
PhD in philosophy you don't have to sit
at the mouth of the cave with the guru
someplace in the himas you need to look
for your answers to these questions
that's it that's the quest that's the
Vision Quest so and when you see
somebody find these things like a lot of
young adults have they're nowhere near
you where you are on your journey you're
solid Steve I mean this is good stuff
but I meet a lot of people like why am I
alive cuz a egg met a sperm really
yeah and what are you willing to die for
nothing really or I don't know right A
lot of people and then they uncover that
they don't have a why is what it comes
down to repeat the questions again why
are you alive and for what are you
willing to die this very
day there's no wrong
answers I have so many young kids in
particular messaging me on Instagram
with the same question which is I think
Society Instagram quotes all of that
stuff has told them that they need to
find find their purpose and it seems
that they're in Hunt of their purpose
like it's some Easter egg um and you
think about that phrase itself find your
purpose it comes loaded with two
assumptions find which means you got to
go search for it and purpose which is a
singular word means there's one of them
somewhere and the unhappiness that I
sense because they were unable to find
this Easter egg somewhere that they've
been searching for causes them to feel
all kinds of inadequacy what do you say
to that yeah well part of it is because
that's the what we call in in business
the go find a rock theory of leadership
where the the CEO says to an employee go
give me a rock like what go give me a
rock okay so you go outside and you
bring a rock back in the boss says wrong
Rock that's not helpful right that's go
find your purpose that's the go find a
rock theory of leadership it's like what
rock how where do I look the world is
full of rocks that's so you need to be a
lot more specific and figuring out
deeply why you believe you're walking
the Earth why you actually are alive
besides just the mechanical you know
explanation for what we understand in in
10th grade biology the real why the Deep
why you're alive and and think really I
mean if with push came to shove I would
die for this I actually would die for
this thing that's when you understand
what your deepest values are that's when
you can actually write your mission
statement that's what it comes down to
and that's how people actually find is
opposed to just platitudes on the
internet of go find your purpose as if I
mean I I spent a lot of time in darmala
in in the Himalayan Foothills this where
the Dal Lama lives in in um in Northern
India and uh when I'm me in darm Solo
was a little village until the Daly Lama
went there about 1960 when he was exiled
from China when was kicked out of Tibet
and now it's not a metropolis but
there's tons of people there and there's
I meet a lot of westerners there there's
Seekers I'm a seek Seeker man gosh yeah
yeah I'm a seeker and so I'm going to go
to a place where I feel like there's a
lot of positive spiritual energy and
don't get me wrong I mean I've you know
I've studied meditation with the Dal
Lamas Tibetan Buddhist monks I mean it's
I'm a much better Catholic on the basis
of this I feel like I'm I'm I'm a deeper
Christian on the basis of this but the
idea of just going someplace and and and
randomly looking hoping that your
purpose just hunts you down is misguided
you have to have a much better more
specific sense of what you're looking
for and these things coherence
significance and purpose as part of
meaning or the way to do it and those
two questions are a good way at least to
get started there's going to be a huge
you know group of people that are listen
to this and thinking you know what I
don't have anything that I would die for
and I don't really know why I'm alive
yeah and that's just made me hugely good
news it's incredibly good news because
that's the basis of your adventure is to
find those things cuz in point of fact
there are things out there you just
don't know them yet and you haven't been
looking for them you've been who knows
what you've been looking for like maybe
even looking for what I like right why
is that wrong there's nothing wrong but
it's just not going to find it's not
going to be the secret of finding your
meaning what I enjoy is a different
pillar of Happiness a lot of people will
say if I figure out what I enjoy then
I'll find my meaning no those are
different there different you're over on
that branch of the tree you're trying to
get over on this branch of the tree
different questions so I'm that person
say that person now and I don't have
answers to either you tell me it's
that's a great place to be because it
means the start of my adventure yeah
what do I do put my shoes on and leave
the house what what Jo so there's a a
lot of different protocols you can
actually start depending on where where
you on your life one of the things that
I actually recommend is reading more not
reading garbage and dumb stuff and not
even reading the news I put people on a
protocol of 15 minutes a day of of of
real reading actually there's a
three-part plan you want to hear the
three-part plan to actually start
figuring out the answers of these
questions M you don't have to answer the
questions directly but number one is
start thinking to yourself what do I
think is right and wrong what are my
moral principles what are my moral
non-negotiables that's the moral basis
of living it's the foundation of
actually figuring out the answers to
your questions so for me that might be I
think like free speech is important for
example um treating people with dignity
equality cool right and this is going to
change over the course of your life too
so you know you're 28 years younger than
me when you're my age is going to be
different and and saying to yourself
that's good I want to change I want to
change I want to change and that means
that one of your non-negotiables is
moral flexibility perhaps really
important that you're able to evolve
right the world doesn't want you to
evolve the world wants you to be rigid
because you're a better soldier in the
culture War when you're not able to say
huh what I thought actually probably
isn't right huh weird right okay so so
that's that's number one is the moral
foundations and thinking about that you
know I I asked my students to take out a
piece of paper and write start writing
things down that they think he the
things that I actually think are right
and wrong here the basis of the way that
I want to live now this is a very yian
idea Carl Jung said that the basis of
happiness is figuring out what you
believe and acting according to it
living according to it that the basis of
unhappiness is living not in accord with
your own
morals in other words I believe these
things are right and wrong and I'm
systematically violating them it's so
incredibly empowering when talk to a
young woman or man and I say for example
what do you think is a decent way to
treat a member of the opposite sex when
you're on a date and they'll tell me and
I say are you acting according to that
they're like no I said that's why you're
unhappy according to Carl Yung but also
according to Common Sense Once you know
what that is and say I'm going to start
acting and living according to my own
principles your life starts to change
why is that so say someone right now is
for example cheating on their partner
but they know and they're against
cheating they're against cheating they
know it's everybody's against cheating
by the way betraying somebody you love
everybody's against betraying somebody
you love right that's actually natural
law if you believe there's any natural
law why is why why is that making them
unhappy that's making them unhappy
because that's doing violence to their
own sense of propriety you're hurting
yourself you know the most ancient
wisdom traditions and religious
Traditions when they talk about Sin you
know Islam and Christianity and Judaism
and Hinduism and name the religion
there's a concept of sin right sin in
almost every religious tradition is not
offending God it's hurting yourself it's
self-destructive Behavior you're doing
something not in accord with the way
that you want to live and in so doing
you're weakening yourself you're making
it harder for you
to understand yourself as a good person
as a person of Integrity as an upright
person which we actually need and again
there's a lot of go back to the social
psychology research on this we need to
see ourselves as good people it goes
back to your point as well about
helplessness and agency because if I
know that that is bad but I can't seem
to stop myself doing it yeah I'm telling
myself that I'm low agency and I'm
helpless I'm a victim of my own sin yeah
I'm a victim of my own weakness I'm a
victim of my own impulses so this is one
of the reasons that people will be like
I hate how I eat what are they actually
saying they're not saying that I I hate
you know I mean like I I'm a sugar Fiend
I love I just can't get enough of it I
don't drink alcohol but I drink tons of
sugar lots of sugar I shouldn't do it
now it doesn't offend my sense of
propriety to be sure right but I could
get to the point where I'm so unhealthy
that I hate that about myself because
I'm actually hurting myself but I'm
being controlled by my impulses this
getting in line with your own views and
making a plan and this is where the New
Year's resolutions about taking off the
weight
actually make sense because it's not
about the ab veins it's about being
morally consistent with your own view of
the person person that you want to be is
what this comes down but you can't do it
till you lay it out until you actually
put it in black and white write down
your moral philosophy I don't care how
dumb it is write down your moral
philosophy and say make a plan to start
living according to it that's the base
of the pyramid there's two other parts
okay the second part is a contemplative
tradition is contemplation you need more
contemplation such that you can
experience Transcendence now there's a
bunch of different ways to do this right
um this is why everybody wants to do
mindfulness meditation that's all that
is is basically is sitting still without
your phone and and and and focusing on
being alive so there a lot of ways to do
it there's informal ways to do it my
colleague Ellen Langer if you had her on
the show no super interesting person she
actually was the one who brought the
concept of mindfulness to the West about
30 years ago wow she wrote a book called
mindfulness she's a she was the first
woman tenured in the psychology
department at Harvard she's phenomenal
and she's just absolutely frustra and
and she says that mindfulness is best
practiced if you're sitting on the train
by putting away your phone putting your
hands in your lap and looking out the
window can they listen to this podcast
while they do that because no you should
listen to the podcast but not during
those periods okay and start with five
minutes of a of of just simple
contemplation of life now there are
other ways to do it prayer is a really
good way to do it too religious
Traditions are excellent at doing it but
people in a distracted world don't do
that at all you need to be in your head
you need to stop distracting yourself
and systematically stop distracting
yourself because in your default mode
Network you'll actually start to think
about things that actually matter
including the things that are in the
fundamental moral basis that you've that
you've started to formulate you need
contemplation I was thinking about this
last night I don't know why I was
thinking about this but this is how
weird I am I was thinking about why I
don't pray anymore because I grew up in
a Christian faith until the age of about
18 are you still Christian no and every
time we had dinner for my whole
childhood the family sit around the
table one of us would have would pray
and we'd just basically give thanks for
things we're you know grateful for right
and I stopped praying because I no
longer have the Christian faith but but
I was thinking last night it doesn't
mean I need to give up the prayer which
is just an exercise in gratitude to be
thankful for the nature of my life and
that would serve if and I don't have to
pray to something I can just pray for
gratitude well you can contemplate you
can contemplate the source of your
gratitude so gratitude listing is really
important way for to focus uh on the the
we're resentful creatures because we
have a negativity bias we have a
tendency to pay attention to the
negative things in our lives
disproportionately because that tendency
serves us for survival you know you know
you pay attention to the worst thing
that happened at the dinner not the best
thing that happened to the dinner for a
reason I mean we've evolved to the snap
of The Twig behind you does not make you
think oh bet that's my friend right so
that that's just how we're Revol and the
way to not that let that become all
adapted is for you to contemplate the
sources of your gratitude which are
incredibly abundant now the reason you
stop praying is because you don't
believe there's anybody on the other end
of the line listening yeah yeah you
think that you're it's like the ghost
phone in Japan after the after the the
tsunami the earthquake and tsunami a guy
set up a telephone booth that's not
connected where the phone is not
connected and 30,000 people have gone
and picked up the phone and talk to
their dead
relatives that's the ghost phone and um
that's not satisfying for you with with
respect to prayer because your kid
version of religion was the reason
you're doing that is because you're
talking to God you've got a direct
transmission mechanism to God and now
you don't think that's actually the case
so you stop doing the contemplation
right now it's probably
worth think rethinking an adult version
of your faith as opposed to being put
off by the a lot of people are really
put off by the kid version of their
faith it's like really yeah like all
weird stuff and doesn't make doesn't
make sense but a a
most likely according to the data you're
going to start becoming interested in
your Christian faith again as you get
older it doesn't mean you're going to
have the same faith that you had on the
contrary you probably won't but you'll
start being like you know there's
certain things I miss about that and and
life actually is messy and there is
suffering that's hard to explain but
there's lots of things in life that are
hard to explain and maybe there's
something in there that I didn't
understand before so openness to that
I'm not saying for sure but I'm saying
just be open to it and then the top is
wisdom and that requires reading or or
you
know the accumulation of knowledge not
everybody's a big reader and there's so
many different ways to get good
information at this point pod podcast
for example but the whole point is is
reading or or acquiring information in
the wisdom tradition so uh you know read
the stoic philosophers read the nicomaki
and ethics of Aristotle read the babad
Gita read the Quran read the Bible read
read read and start with 15 minutes a
day of that kind of reading which you
can go years saying I wish I read it and
you don't right I mean it's it's crazy
we'll spend all this time scrolling
Instagram when we could spend just 15
minutes a day reading the meditations of
Marcus
aelius and and the letters of Sena and
they incredibly enriching right it's
like whoa boom starting at 15 minutes a
day so do the work what do I believe
spend some time in contemplation and do
the reading your life's about to change
that's the protocol that's the Tibetan
Buddhist protocol for actually
finding F starting to find meaning in
your life but I've I've prescribed this
to others and I've done it myself and
this really works it helps you find on
the path to the answers to those
questions build the life you
want it's a book it's a book sat in
front of me here that that has your name
on it and who's this Oprah Winfrey I'd
like to give you young authors a leg
up how did you so you co-wrote this book
with Oprah yeah yeah how how did you
meet Oprah she called me turns out she's
a I know it's it's she this is Oprah
Winfrey I'm like yeah I'm Batman I mean
it was Oprah Winfrey The Voice she's
iconic all over the world for sure and
it turns out that she was a regular
reader of my column in the Atlantic on
Thursday mornings how to build a life
which is a different area of the signs
of happiness every week that I cover and
read my last book which is called from
strength to strength finding success
happiness and deep purpose in the second
half of life right so that was a book
she read on the first day it came out
and I went on her Super Soul podcast and
we were thick as thieves just
immediately because we have the same
goals as lift people up and bring him
together in the spirit of happiness and
love she does it differently because
she's not an academic she has incredible
platform I've never seen a platform like
she has where you know she says one
thing and people are like H that's it's
good thing to do but she's always
looking for it's interesting because she
has the money and power and fame and she
uses them she's cracked the code she
uses them in service of other people and
that's her whole goal from the very
beginning she's never said anything to
disabuse me of the idea that that's how
she lives and uh we started doing some
some things together and some podcast
together and she called up and she said
you know if I had my show still she for
25 years she had this iconic show on
television in the United States called
the Oprah win show and millions and
millions of people watched it every day
and went off the air in about 2014 or
something she says if I had my show I'd
have you on 30 times and then you'd have
your show she said but I don't have the
show anymore so let's do kind of a
version of that and let me host a
book and and so we wrote the book
together all over the last winter in the
winter of 2022 2023 I went away to she
lives in mono California I live I went
and got a house in San CL California and
we we structured the thing and you know
at her place and we went back and forth
on the and it was just blast it was
about you know how to manage yourself
and once you're able to manage your own
feelings and emotions like a pro then
you'll no longer be distracted and you
can focus on the things that actually
matter for your life and that's how you
build your life and you you called me um
a mad scientist earlier I'd have to take
the test I think you nailed it I think
you nailed
it most likely yeah a which is that
which appears in your book in the the
section about the unique sort of unique
mix of um Happiness and happiness and
you talk about this panas schore system
what are these categories and why did
you call me a mad scientist so the panis
test is in the book and it's actually on
the website um at Arthur brooks.com
where anybody can take it for free it's
a it's a personality test based on the
intensity of your positive and negative
affect AKA
mood everybody's got more or less the
same emotions everybody feels joy and
interest and surprise and anger and
sadness and disgust and and and fear but
we have them in different intensities
depending on who we are and there's
really four kinds of people with these
different intensities there's some
people that have very high affect High
positive affect they have high highs and
high negative effect effect low lows
these are mad scientists that's a
quarter of the population Now by
construction it's the quar of the
population because it's above average on
both then there are people who are high
highs and
low lows I mean I should say that they
have intense positive emotion but but
weak negative emotion right these are
cheerleaders okay so they have they feel
their positive affect very intensely and
their negative effect effect very weakly
oh okay so they're like always happy
they're not always happy but they tend
to they tend to be in a better mood and
see the brighter side of things they
tend to downgrade threats and think
everything is going to be okay okay
that's a quarter of the population M and
everybody wants to be that by the way
but that's not necessarily the best way
to be and they don't make the best CEOs
because they're they have a hard time
paying attention to threats they don't
want bad news and they have a terrible
time giving bad news or giving people
bad valuations so working for a CEO
who's a cheerleader is great for a
minute but then it starts to become very
frustrating because you hear him telling
the the incompetent idiot in the cubicle
next to you that that she's doing an an
unbelievably good job ah okay so you I
mean you got to be realistic to be a
good I mean you're an entrepreneur you
know perfectly there's lotss of threats
out there you got to take them seriously
yeah yeah yeah so then there are people
who are high negative low positive these
are poets these are people who generally
speaking there's a place in the lyic
system called the ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex that's the part that
makes you a ruminator ruminators are
people who this part of the brain this
this part of the brain is dedicated to
making on problems and negative things
and regret and that I can't believe that
I said that thing I feel so stupid for
saying that thing and what does she
really think of me etc etc it's also the
part of the reing that you use when
you're highly creative comedians yeah
well for sure for sure you know I pal
around with a guy Nam rain Wilson who
was in the American version of the
office he played Dwight and Rain told me
that comedians tend to be depressed but
the reason is because they find out that
they're funny and they can substitute
humor for sadness it's a substitute
emotion it's called a metacognitive
Technique we talk a lot about that in
the book so then poets are they tend to
be high ruminators so high negative
affect they focus a lot of negative
things because of this hyperdeveloped
part of their brains they also tend to
be really creative because that's the
same part of your brain that when you're
working on a business plan or a symphony
and they also tend to be romantic
because infatuation is ruminating on
another person that's kind of the poet
profile right and then last but not
least there's low low people who are low
affect people these are Judges these are
people who they they're happy and
unhappy but they feel their moods less
intensely than other people and so they
they don't freak out you know these are
really good surgeons these are really
good judges they're very good Secret
Service agents you don't want somebody
to cut you open and say oh my God you
you don't want your surgeon to be like
that and so there's a a gift and a role
for all four of these quadrants most
great entrepreneurs are mad scientists
because they they the reason that
they're Entre is because they want to
feel things intensely because everything
is intense and they do everything
intensely right you don't have that many
people who are just like super chill
like
yeah interesting yeah it fits that's why
you just having a deep conversation with
you you I can see that you have a lot of
mad scientific characteristics to you
you feel things deeply is that fair it
is fair yeah I mean that's the one I I
resonate with the most and I do describe
myself as being a bit intense my team
know me I think I'm I think I come
across as a bit intense what's your
girlfriend I'm going to say that she is
a cheerleader a I'm married to a
cheerleader oh really yeah and what you
find is that cheerleaders they can they
can have the best of times but
cheerleaders tend to be struggle with
the mad scientist yeah right it's like
like why like everything's so great for
you why are you gloomy you know it's
like why can't you look in the bright
side of things like why are you grouchy
all the time what's wrong with you Steve
like there's a spelling mistake on our I
know it's like why why is that bothering
you yeah yeah so that's That's a classic
thing everybody can be with everybody
else but the compliments are really
important the biggest mistake that
people make in dating markets is they
look for their their op they look for
the their their doppelganger they look
for their clone you shouldn't look for
your clone you should look for your
compliment why because you'll be happier
when you complete each other that's when
people who complete each other you find
that very happy marriages often happen
between an introvert and an extrovert if
they learn to appreciate each other so
it's not you know hammer and T songs all
the time for the differences but when
people for example one of the reasons
that dating apps are so unsuccessful for
giving people you know satisfactory
dating experiences people have more and
more and more choice but they're more
likely to say they're not satisfied with
the people they're dating and not
attracted to the people that they're
dating it's because they'll set up a
dating profile saying I vote this way I
like this music I live here I like these
things I want somebody with these
preferences and they get somebody who's
their sibling which is as my adult
children will remind me is not
hot difference is hot it's so true
because I never would have said I want
someone that is spiritual um that is
really involved in spirituality and
believes in things that you just can't
see my girlfriend believes in all the
chakras and these energies and she'll
read and she just believes in it all and
it's funny because I never would have
said that's what I wanted but I
absolutely love it and that means that I
actually she's actually pulled me into
her world she's made me more spiritual
she's made me believe in things I never
would have believed before uhhuh and
she's completing me in that regard it's
really great it's really great you mean
you crack the code in that way and
finding all the ways that you're
different and celebrating those
particular differences is really key to
a to a good relationship and not wishing
the person were more like you this is
very important that this is a
relationship killer is that wishing that
your partner were more like you is is
just a form of egotism everyone tries to
change their partner though don't they
yeah well I mean it's interesting it's
like there's there's the old Axiom that
women are frustrated because they
thought they could change their husbands
and they can't and and um h husbands are
frustrated because they thought their
wives would never change and they do I
don't
know there is truth in that
relationships and love how important is
this as a subject for happiness it's the
number one area of interest of my
students really my average student is 28
years old so they're MBA students
they're Master's students they've all
gone through college they've gone to
work and they've come back to the
Harvard Business School you have to have
some business experience to get the
business master's degree and this is the
number one thing they want to talk about
they want to learn about they want to
learn about it scientifically they want
toar learn about the neurochemical
Cascade of what's actually happening in
your brain and at what point you can't
control it anymore we have a lot of case
studies at the business school about you
know CEOs who were dismissed for
inappropriate relationships with
subordinates I mean it's a classic theme
you know it's I and the last line of the
case study is I was the the CEO looking
out the window of the train after being
dismissed going I don't know what
happened yeah and so we look at brain
scans and say this is what happened and
you can see it in the brain kind of I
mean that somebody who's really in love
uh has you brain activity it looks an
awful lot like a methamphetamine addict
brain scan I mean your brain is if
you're at a certain point in the falling
love process your brain is captured so I
mean at the beginning when people meet
there's a there's a a hormonal um
reaction with testosterone and estrogen
which are you know sex hormones
obviously and you know when people see
somebody who's really attractive that's
why they they want to look attractive
because that's the that's the ignition
mechanism that typically happens after
that you see a big uh increase in in
noradrenaline AKA nor um epinephrine and
dopamine level so you have anticipation
of reward and Euphoria that's sort of
the second line of things that tend to
happen in this chemical Cascade that's
going on when you're falling in love
after that you see a dip in serotonin
which is really interesting so serotonin
we think about as the as the neurom
modulator of of peace and happiness
which is what a lot of the psychiatric
drugs are trying to manipulate when when
they feel that it's an imbalance so
people who are clinically depressed will
often get selective serotonin reuptake
Inhibitors meaning you maintain a higher
level of Serotonin and that's all really
controversial still I mean because we
don't really understand that very well
but we do know that when people are
falling in love that they're more likely
to be ruminative and infatuated remember
that part of the brain the ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex that does rumination
it'll be more active when serotonin is
low and so serotonin will be low so you
start ruminating on the other person
that's when the infatuation part of the
relationship really kicks in and then
you get to the point of attachment which
is which is invol which involves
oxytocin which is a neuropeptide that
functions as a hormone that makes you
attached to the other person very
profoundly attached to the other person
that's intensely pleasurable so it's
like and the longer you let it go the
harder it is for your brain not to be
really really captured you wouldn't go
to a methamphetamine addict and say why
did you buy methamphetamine that's
illegal they' be like I'm an I'm an
addict I'm a junkie it's the same thing
as when somebody's sleeping with a
subordinate are people that are in love
in in relationships happier
statistically no on the contrary because
being in love especially in the early
stages of being in love is not
associated with what we would associate
with actual happiness because it has
jealousy tons of jealousy which is you
know the rumination part when your
serotonin levels are really low it's
hard for you to say ah I feel so great
you feel euphoric and you like it in its
own way but if you kept that if you
stayed in that stage you'd go out of
your mind and you'd be miserable because
there's jealousy there's surveillance
behaviors are really common and you know
this there's no nobody would say that
when I'm surveilling my intimate partner
that's when I'm
happiest nobody likes that but but
people tend to do that because you're
there's a lot of your brain is basically
saying I'm trying to figure out if this
is somebody who's going to betray me
back to evolution is this somebody who's
going to wander off and raise somebody
else's kids is this somebody who's going
to be when I don't know it carrying
somebody else's baby which is how men
and women actually they tend to express
sexual jealousy in those two interesting
there's a guy at um University of Texas
at Austin that studies jealousy the most
jealousy provoking thing for men is an
image of their intimate partner having
sex with somebody else for women it's an
image of their intimate partner saying I
love you to somebody else and the reason
is because traditionally or
evolutionarily women have to be worried
that their partner is going to take go
take care of somebody else's children
and men have to be worried that they're
not the actual father of the children
which According to some estimates is 15%
of paternity which is misattributed
worldwide makes sense that's a
lot no it makes sense well so
fortunately my kids look like me yeah I
one that's adopted she doesn't look like
me this idea in chapter four of your
book of focusing Less on yourself leads
to happiness how can you prove that's
the case so there's a there's a lot of
experimental tests that actually show
this using human subjects and so one of
the classic uh experiments there's these
guys at at Northwestern there's a
fabulous social psychologist named Adam
weights I don't know if you've had him
on your show before he's a really
impressive and Innovative social
psychologist he did a an experiment
where he took the undergraduate students
you always use the undergraduate pool at
your University because they'll do
literally anything for 20 bucks and and
and he put them into three groups one
had to do moral Deeds they had to do
random acts of kindness one had to do
moral thoughts they had to sit and think
beautiful thoughts about other people
and one had to do self focus sort of
self-care things go do something
something that really makes you feel
good and they looked at their happiness
over you know a series of weeks with
these interventions and we they found
that moral Deeds were happier than moral
thoughts and moral thoughts were happier
than self-care that's what they found in
other words you and again this this is
basically showing the same thing that
you know I did research for years and
years and years about happiness and
sharable giving if you're lonely the
most important thing you can do is
volunteer just is if you give money away
statistically you're more likely to make
more money next year incredible
investment strategy and the reason is
because you see yourself as an agent of
of positive change you're empowered when
you're helping other people you when you
give love you get love that's the bottom
line is what it comes down to and so all
of these experiments find kind of the
same thing if you put uh you know two
groups randomly selected of people um
one group is playing board games and the
other is helping you know sixth graders
with their math the ones helping sixth
graders with their math will have a mood
boost for days afterward I mean this is
just helping other people helps you not
focus on the Psycho Drama inside Steve's
head and it makes it so that life
actually has a Transcendent aspect to it
you get perspective you get peace and
furthermore you get empirical
confirmation that you are that person
that you want to be is happiness or
negativity contagious yes that's
emotional contagion there's a lot of
literature on emotional contagion it's a
virus it's a mind virus negativity is a
virus negativi is a virus but so is POS
positivity that you can actually so you
find that you know when I go into
companies which I do a lot these days I
do a lot of Happiness teaching inside
you know executive teams and
corporations and when I walk into a
company I can I can I can pretty quickly
ascertain which virus is going around
you know this is why the mood and
emotional well-being and emotional
self-management of CEOs is so critically
important because you know everybody's
like oh the bosses the boss is having a
hard time today though I think a boss
got yelled at this morning at breakfast
or whatever it happens to be because the
they can see it and the result is it
tends to the virus tends to pass around
a this sucks attitude is horrible inside
families and we see it and it will
transmit from one person to one person
to another person to another person
that's why it's hard to live with a high
negative affect person that's why
because High negative affect people will
spread a negativity virus even if you
live down the street well it depends on
how much contact you have with that
person and so you know that's why you
want your kids to hang out with positive
friends that's why would you you'll when
you have your kids and when my kids were
little they would have that one friend
who's like happy all the time you love
that kid you have the one kid who's just
bummed out all the time you're like I
don't want my kid to be around that
because that that infects the attitudes
of of the of your children in the book
you say living within a mile of a friend
or family member who becomes happier
makes you 25% likelier to become happier
too if you have contact with that person
obviously it it's not going to transmit
just through the air it's not you know
it's not the Corona virus but uh but you
have to have contact with the person but
you know and the way that they they
measured that that's called the
Framingham heart study which was out in
fra that's a suburb of Boston but for
many many many years they were looking
at the trajectory of people's lives to
look at heart you know issues but then
they started measuring everything else
and they found for example that obesity
is highly is is is very easy to catch
when your friends become obese you
become more obese that when your friends
get divorced you're more likely to get
divorced that when your friends get
happy you're more likely to get happy is
what we see and and and the more
proximity that they have to you measured
geographically or in terms of the
intimacy of the relationship the
stronger the transmission mechanism I
think a lot about that and how we take
on other people's problems when they're
friends and family um what you say to
that and does it matter that we take on
other people's problems sort of I mean
that's there's a big distinction between
empathy and compassion so the best way
to be a parent or a partner or a friend
is to be compassionate and that's not
the same thing as empathy our society
overvalues empathy empathy is feeling
somebody else's pain that's Tak taking
on their problems the worst parents of
teenagers are empathetic or highly
empathetic people it's like yeah I feel
your pain why because you're not
actually helping you got to do things
that that that you know I may feel your
pain but I can't be I can't be paralyzed
by that on the contrary I got to do hard
things you're not going to like son
that's what being it that's the reason
we always say you're not his friend
you're his dad you know and that's means
be compassionate don't be empathetic the
same thing is true with the big level I
mean I I would argue that our our
welfare systems in our countries are
need to be more compassionate um as
opposed to Simply empathetic and you
know that's and that we could actually
help people a lot more too being
compassionate means being hard as steel
and doing the things that people
actually need because you love them not
just because you're actually feeling
their pain so in our families we need to
say what does this person that I love
actually need notwithstanding the
feelings that they're transmitting to me
and sometimes that means you got to care
for your own happiness like they say in
the plane put on your own oxygen mask
first take care of your own happiness so
you're not you're not getting this
negativity virus all the time being
paralyzed by somebody else's pain you're
not going to help him enough no it's
almost never well I mean there there are
cases when somebody is just a Schism but
I I only recommend pican family Schism
when there's abuse and you know somebody
being unhappy is not abuse political
differences really not abuse those are
that's a it's like one in six Americans
in this country is not speaking to a
family member because of Pol political
differences that's insane that's simply
insane that doesn't not count as any
good reason to do that unless there's
actual abuse quick one if you guys have
heard me speak on this podcast before
about company culture and the secret to
building a world-class company you know
that everything starts with people which
brings me to our sponsor on this podcast
which I'm very excited to announce today
which is LinkedIn jobs the entrepreneurs
and business owners that listen to this
podcast you'll probably want to hear
this one so stay tuned for a second
whenever I'm looking to hire my first
Port of Call is LinkedIn jobs throughout
all of my companies this is our go-to
method of hiring iring and let me tell
you why firstly it's super easy it takes
about 5 minutes to create a free job
post on LinkedIn and secondly you can
add a hiring frame to your profile
picture allowing others to know that
you're hiring and lastly you can set up
screening questions which is linkedin's
way of helping you to find the best
possible candidate that matches your
needs and today I'm giving the D ofo
Community a free Linkin job post head to
linkedin.com
doac now and let me know how you get on
and terms and conditions apply that's a
free job poster go get it now who's
happier introverts or extroverts yes so
extroverts is the classic finding tons
of studies sign find that extroverts
have more positive affect they have
higher they tend to have higher mood but
introverts have special gifts they have
closer
relationships they have deeper emotional
connections to other people and the
result of that is that they have
long-term friendship and Marriage
Partners that sustain them in a way that
extroverts don't extroverts often get
can get really lonely because they are
you an extrovert it's such an
interesting question because you might
not be even though you're a mad
scientist I don't think I am do you get
when you're at a party do you find that
you get exhausted I looked at Jackie's
know me many many years five years I'm
an introvert I just want to be alone so
when you're at a party do you find that
it sucks energy out of you I don't go to
the party certainly your Baseline is
introversion but you have extroverted
characteristics because you're able to
do good entrepreneurs know how to be
extroverts when they need to be which is
important and you run a podcast if
you're a true introvert it's like I got
to meet Arthur Brooks what a pain no I
like deep conversations I don't like
small talk yeah yeah you do you have
close friends oh yeah the same five guys
i' I've known years that you've known
since College yeah basically no others
other than this slot here who I consider
friends but the same five that I've
known for 12 12 years they're real
friends not deal friends no they're real
friends they were there when I was
shoplifting pizzas to feed myself same
Five Guys so that's interesting and and
but so extroverts they tend to get more
shortterm happiness and introverts tend
to have more long-term happiness so what
you find is that extroverts they tend to
get more enjoyment and and introverts
tend to get more meaning metacognition
you used this word earlier on when we
were talking about happiness it sounds
like almost an antidote to unhappiness
in respects what is metacognition
explain this like I'm a 10-year-old yeah
okay so metacognition simply means
thinking about your thinking and taking
more time as you react to your emotions
that's what metacognition is all about
so theot are produced in the lyic system
of the brain an ancient part of the
brain you react to them and decide what
they mean in the prefrontal CeX the sea
Suite of your head that takes time those
are not the same place you need to
experience your emotions in your
conscious executive brain which is the
part the front the part of the front the
bumper of tissue right behind your
forehead so when your kids are little
when your kids are 10 and they're
freaking out about something you don't
say don't be so limic you say use your
word
what you're saying is be metacognitive
allow yourself to explain this thing
that you're feeling and in so doing
you're using your prefrontal cortex as
opposed to relying on the lyic tissue of
your brain so write it down would be an
example writing externally is phenomenal
classic case so you're anxious yeah
anxiety is unfocused fear that's what it
is fear was adapted in in the human
species so that to be episodic and
intense the way that fear is supposed to
work is that something happens it alarms
you it illuminates the igala of your
brain that sends a signal through the
hypothalamus to the pituitary gland
which then signals the adrenal gland
sitting above the kidneys to spit out
stress hormones this happens in 74
milliseconds of the the perception of a
threat in you know the occipital lobe of
your brain where you're you know your
visual cortex exists boom this thing
happens really really quick this is and
saved your life many many times
thousands of times you know because you
live in London and you can get run over
at any given second it's crazy well
actually because I'm looking the wrong
direction for oncoming traffic that's my
problem there so so that's how that's
how that works is the whole point so
fear is supposed to work that way very
episodic very occasional the problem in
Modern Life is that we have all of these
vague threats that are happening that
are kind of half Illuminating our our
amydala which is giving us a little drip
of cortisol into our brain all the time
and that's unfocused and freaking us out
so the way to actually solve that
problem metacognitive is say okay okay I
got to focus it take out a piece of
paper number one number one thing that
I'm afraid of right now that's actually
giving me this anxiety that's giving me
this discomfort write it down why is it
happening what's the worst thing that
can happen and what would I do if that
happened and you literally moving the
thing experience from the amydala which
is the emotional Center to the
prefrontal cortex which is The Logical
which is that's for your SE suite and
that should kill the anxiety it will it
greatly attenuate the anxiety it will
turn it into a logical kind of fear
that's the right reaction to these
threats and it will change your life so
if you do that if you're experiencing a
lot of
anxiety you know unfocused fear focus it
every day for 10 minutes write it down I
have a I have a I'm a very anxious
person I have a running list of the
things that I'm afraid of a running list
I have lots and lots of lists I keep
lots of lists because journaling is so
critically important I also have a
failure list what are you afraid of I'm
afraid of failure I'm afraid of failing
I'm a total striver from the very
beginning failing what's what does what
would failure look like I know that's
the thing it's an unfocused fear and so
when I write it down and I focus it I go
oh yeah it's true you know that's that's
the point so it's failure is a spectre
for Strivers it's a kind of a when you
look at it it goes away yeah yeah but
when you're not looking at it it's there
and part of the reason is because your
self-image is one of somebody who's
successful so you're self- objectifying
as a successful person you're success
addicted meaning the vental item of your
brain gets tapped every time somebody
says Steve you got another 7 million
downloads or something that is not
inherently meaningful in that particular
way because the metric is actually what
Taps your ventral stum again and again
and again and so then if that's going in
the wrong direction and you're not
making progress then that sort of feels
somehow not successful which means that
things are going in the wrong direction
and that's just like this
fantasm right it's like and so okay
focus it focus it look at it poof
right disappears it doesn't entirely
disappear it turns into what it really
is which is a mouse not a
lion oh your book is fantastic I mean we
could talk for for so long because
there's so much more in it there's some
of the unb unbelievable stats that I was
reading about around social media and
this one St about um a study showing
that teens who texted more often than
their peers experienced more depression
anxiety and relationship and po
relationships the other things about
laughter and that you can feel 35%
happier um using some humor therapy all
of these things gratitude all of these
things that we haven't haven't covered
but they're all in this fantastic
fantastic book which is so unbelievably
accessible for someone that as smart as
you Oprah had okay oh okay right okay
yeah and I thank you for that because
happiness is a complex thing and I think
there's an industry out there that are
trying to simplify it and put it down to
three steps to happiness or one this one
secret to happiness one weird trick
don't gra you know whatever but your
approach provides the nuance and the
complexity that the subject matter
deserves and I think that offers us a
towards being happier as you talk about
in the book um that's why I wrote it I
wrote it for you oh it actually reads
like you wrote it for me that's the kind
of but I imagine everyone that reads
it's is going to feel that way um I
highly recommend everybody goes and gets
this book ASAP it's a really really
beautiful book as well it's so beautiful
um we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it
for what are we supposed to do about the
things that we cannot control what is
your opinion on this
the things that we can't control are
virtually all outside
ourselves we have to accommodate
ourselves to the fact that we live in a
world where there are many things that
we can't control and focus on the things
that we can how do we deal with things
that we can't control by refocusing our
attention on the parts of our life that
we actually can thus giving us agency
and giving us a sense of peace and
perspective about the truly
uncontrollable ala thank you so much so
wonderful to meet you you've energized
me this morning and we started pretty
early for me this is super early know
it's apprciate it I appreciate it so
much thank you Steve it's wonderful to
be with you I've admired you for such a
long time I get to meet you in person
it's been a joy that means the well to
me someone is uh profound and as smart
as you to say that to me means a ton so
thank you so much Arthur from the bottom
of my heart really really appreciate it
thank you you too thank
[Music]
you as you'll know if you've listened to
this podcast before I'm an investor in a
company called hu I'm on their board and
they sponsor this podcast and I have a
very exciting announcement to make this
product called Daily Greens is one of
the most highly requested products at hu
but it's never been sold in the UK
before
until now it's often difficult to get
all of the greens into our diet that we
need to have a healthy gut microbiome
and a healthy body and with hu's Daily
Greens product with one scoop every
morning a very very delicious scoop you
can get 91 vitamins minerals and whole
food source nutrients into your diet the
most important Point here is I genuinely
believe it tastes delicious it's May my
favorite heal product ever for all the
reasons I've described so if you want
access to this product the link is in
the description below it launches in the
UK in January because of the demand I'm
pretty sure it's going to sell
out do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked to that
episode in the description below I know
you'll enjoy
[Music]
it